---
bibliography: bibliography.bib
---

# Anthropocene: technical and social dimension

## Introduction

We have entered the Anthropocene. We are no longer simply passive observers of the natural world [@Lewis2015]. Instead, we live in a human-dominated geological epoch in which we can no longer maintain a separation between Human and Nature [@Latour2015]. In the face of droughts in California [@AghaKouchak2015], the Great Barrier Reef bleaching event [@Hughes2019; @Conroy2019], and dwindling insect bio mass [@Hallmann2017; Seibold2019], the consequences of the Anthropocene have become hard to ignore [@Sterner2019]. Having recognized that the problem is more than technical, [@Heffernan2011; @Ripple2017], scientists have turned to diverse forms of activism [ @Thompson2021; @Ripple2017; @Vogt2021; @Malm2020], seeking to use their scientific and technical knowledge to develop policy that will hold firms accountable for their practices.

Their efforts face two significant institutional roadblocks. First, firms have strategic reasons for resisting these policies. Firms have already been shown to engage in symbolic responses such as greenwashing: producing communication that misleads people about the extent of their environmental practices or products [@Lyon2015]. Such resistance means that their practices will become decoupled from otherwise sound policy [@Bromley2012]. A robust literature has shown the range of ways that firms engage in such decoupling, from long-term incentive plans that are formally adopted but never really implemented to formally independent boards of directors that are buddy-buddy with the CEO [@Westphal2020b]. But firms also have options even before policy has been decided. As Oliver (1991) argues, they may also defy, contest, manipulate, or reshape the institutional expectations. To understand how policy relates to practice, we need to consider how firms seek to decouple policy from practice through the implementation process.

> Objective one: Develop a model of the dynamics of policy and practice negotiations given the conflicting technical and institutional forces in dealing with the problems of the Anthropocene. 

The problem of policy responses may be more pernicious than a simple decoupling of policy from practice [@Bromley2012], however. Activist scientists seeking to avert problems of the Anthropocene like climate change may pursue sound policy based on their scientific understanding, but climate change is shaped in arenas beyond science, policy, and business [c.f. @Latour2004]. A scientific world view depends on a clear relationship between actions and outcomes, but in many arenas the implications of acting on sound policy are unclear. This leads to a second form of decoupling, means-end decoupling, in which actions and policies are clearly articulated, but the links to climate change outcomes are ambiguous [@Bromley2012]. For example, when social activism enters an arena, the actions may have only an ambiguous relationship to the problem of climate change. **>>We need an example; I am thinking of your protestors here.<<** In other arenas, actors may actively undermine the claims of science--for example, through climate-change denial [@Aronoff2021]. This form of decoupling goes beyond ceremonial conformity and contestation over legitimate policy, and instead undermines the causal claims that support policy. To understand these dynamics, we need to consider a different form of decoupling, we need to consider arenas beyond science, policy, and industry.

> Objective two: What different arenas are there around climate change activity and how do the claims actors make change depending on what arena they are in?

## Context

### Objective one: How does policy emerge given conflicting technical and institutional imperatives.

**>>Think of it, in German you would call that a "Spannungsfeld"--the area of tension where different forces meet. Based on the mechanics of stress, which translates to both mechanical and social tension in German. Maybe an interesting concept to play around with in the future?<<**

Scientists have begun to turn activist in the face of a growing body of scientific and technical evidence demonstrating the urgency of problems like climate change. Their efforts face two forms of institutional resistance. The most commonly studied form is what is known as greenwashing: the intentional production of overly positive communication by firms about their environmental practices [@Lyon2015].  Greenwashing is an example of policy-practice decoupling that allows firms to adopt conflicting policies in response to external pressure without substantively changing ongoing practice [@Bromley2012]. Such symbolic management--the use of either language or practice to appear legitimate [@Westphal2020]--can be found in a variety of domains: corporate directors [@Shi2018]; corporate philanthropy [@Cuypers2016]; corporate governance [@Westphal2016]; and strategic change [@Mantere2012].

But ceremonial conformity to institutional pressures is not the only response to external pressures. For example, Volkswagen manipulated both the emissions systems and the software of its automobiles [@Siano2017]. As @Oliver1991 points out, firms can also defy, manipulate, contest, or even reshape institutional pressures. By defying, contesting, and reshaping policy, firms can soften policy demands because policy makers must take into account what firms will accept. For example, in the 2015 Paris Agreement around climate change, the negotiations "eloquently demonstrated the futility of technical negotiations, without political consensus on the core elements and features of the new agreement" [@Savaresi2016: 16]. The resulting reality of actual practice: pledges for action repeatedly lag ambitions for limiting global warming [@Rogelj2016; @Schleussner2016]. Of course, policy makers are not without tools in this dynamic. For example, @Haack2021 develop a model in which policy makers first lure firms with easy standards and then, through increased transparency, bring them into compliance over time. **>>Aronczyk’s research?<<** But our research on the relationship between policy and practice needs to take into account this dynamic between the technical imperatives of the Anthropocene and the institutional realities of changing policy **>>institutions may deserve an introduction here<<**. 

Here we are interested in those institutional dynamics as legislation on climate action is negotiated, written, and contested on the regional, national, and international scale. Just as scientists may enter the policy scene as climate activists, so may industry representatives also insert themselves into the process either as individuals or organizations as intermediaries. We will focus on the unfolding dynamic between the technical and institutional imperatives as industry representatives engage activist scientists and policy makers. How do industry actors and allies insert themselves into the different stages of policy making? What tools do industry actors and allies have at their disposal to construct institutional imperatives? How do industry actor and allies develop or influence technical knowledge? How does corporate political action shape unfolding policy *before* engaging in symbolic conformity?

### Objective two: How does the landscape of means and ends in the Anthropocene vary depending on the how actors in different arenas encounter each other?

The research on decoupling activities like greenwashing [@Lyon2015] treats the problem as one of firms resisting effective policy. But decoupling can also occur when firms do follow the policies, but the proposed practices cannot achieve the desired outcomes [@Bromley2012]. This second form of decoupling can originate in a range of arenas [@Latour2004], often far beyond the nexus of science, policy, and firm practice that we typically study. For instance, deforestation in Brazil may originate in the arena of crime and violence [@Pailler2018], and the arena of religion plays an outsized role in the success of the Amerian fossil fuel industry past and future [@Dochuk2019]. Problems in the Anthropocene may involve the assumptions of science, but they may emerge through the divergent concerns of other audiences with their own views of effective policy and action: activists, advocates, the larger public, and even those who deny the problems of the Anthropocene.

To arrive at a more complete understanding of the relationship between policy and practice, we need to set the evolving policy debate in a broader social context. Our second objective therefore considers four related problems. First, even within the policy arena, the means-ends relationships may be unclear. For example, both carbon capture policies [@Anderson2016; @Lane2021] and policies promoting biofuels [@Lyon2015] are common policy responses to global warming that may not actually improve climate change outcomes. Instead, they reflect a common problem with policy addressing problems of the Anthropocene: they are symbols of our desire to believe that we are taking action, regardless of whether the action is truly effective. Such policies reflect an additional aspect of greenwashing: it is not always committed just by firms and it may be unintentional [@Nemes2021]. Sometimes we want to believe that our policies will work, even when they do not.

Second, implementing and acting on climate change policy requires broad public support. That support is not always forthcoming, however, as commitments for the Copenhagen accord [cf. @Schussler2014], the Kyoto protocol **>>(need citations)<<** and, most recently, the Paris 'pledge and review' approach all have fallen short of their ambitions [@Rogelj2016; @Schleussner2016]. Unfortunately, the problems of garnering public support run up against a broad-based ignorance about appropriate action. Research shows that there are widely held--but often invalid--understandings about how different actions contribute to global warming. Common-sense and intuition offer poor guidance on even basic issues like the energy usage of heating and air conditioning [@Attari2010] or the emissions associated with a burger vis-à-vis a salad [@Camilleri2019].

Third, activists engage climate change concerns in ways that may undermine public support. For example, activist groups like Extinction Rebellion (ER) see inattention to environmental damage in the Anthropocene as a critical concern. Other environmental movements have targeted industries--for example the coal industry, coal mining, and coal power plants. These actions are often only loosely coupled to climate outcomes: at first glance, for instance, there is only a passing connection between activities like blocking traffic in London and an outcome of slashing the carbon emissions before the year 2030. These activist groups seek to generate public attention by disrupting public events--an old tactic of activist groups [c.f. @Elsbach1992]--but their actions may not lead to the desired outcomes or even have the opposite effect.

Finally, these different understandings all exist against a backdrop of climate denial and the intentional sowing of skepticism. Many of the dynamics behind climate change are driven by another group of activist networks of actors: individuals and organizations intentionally sowing doubt about climate change knowledge. Research on these networks has been limited as scholars focus more on individual actors [@Farrell2016], but activist organizations such as the Cato Institute and the Heartland Institute, industry associations such as the American Petroleum Institute, and fossil fuel companies have all sought to shape our understandings of climate change [@Banerjee2015; @Bonneuil2021; @Supran2017; @Supran2020].

In pursuing the second objective, we develop insights on the different arenas in which issues of the Anthropocene are contested, and on the actors that are commonly involved in this contestation. We analyze how this contestation determines and is simultaneously shaped by the state of the natural environment [@Maguire2009]. What arenas are there outside of realms of business, science, and policy making where these processes take place? How does policy eventually emerge if not in a process where science is translated into policy? The contestation--where is happens in the public--also holds a promise: we can set aside our differences and talk about matters of concerns [@Latour2005]. But when entering a public arena and engaging in public discourse, do actors actually move closer to a recoupling of means and ends?

## Methodology

We pursue the two objectives in two consecutive stages. In stage one we conduct a mixed quantitative and qualitative methods study [@Edmondson2007] on the oil infrastructure in the United States (see next section on research setting). At the end of that stage, we write and submit a study on Objective one. In stage two, we carry out a qualitative study on the two most controversial oil infrastructure projects of the 2010s: Keystone XL and the Dakota Access Pipeline. We analyze the different arenas where the projects were debated and decided. Based on our findings on these arenas, we write up and submit a study on Objective two.

### Research setting

We will begin the first stage of our two-year project by compiling data on the oil infrastructure in North America. We use oil pipelines to exemplify the broader context of the fossil fuel industry. Pipelines are of particular interest, because they are often built on public land and hence are the first to be affected by a changing political landscape. They are also critical bottlenecks to fossil fuel production and consumption, particularly for Canada. Hence we expect to find fertile ground here for studying the emergence of policy in the Anthropocene. We study the competing effects of a changing technical understanding and prevailing institutional interests. Based on an evolved technical understanding, projects such as Keystone XL, the Dakota Access Pipeline, and the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion have faced sharp public resistance, including from outspoken scholars [@Cheon2018]. Meanwhile, the pipeline industry wields its power in a regulatory arena which follows institutionalized rules that are decoupled from both science and national policy [@Palen2014].

### Stage 1: A model on the emergence of policy in the Anthropocene

In the first stage, we will develop a new model of how policy emerges in the Anthropocene. We first review  existing understandings of how institutional processes affect the efficiency of emergent policy [e.g., @Bromley2012; @Lyon2015; @Oliver1991]. We also review the literature on lobbying and the fossil fuel industry [e.g., @Farrell2016; @Mann2016; @Supran2020] as well as prior studies of the pipeline industry [e.g., @Chandler2020; @Park2019]. For the study on Objective two, we are interested in how policy and practice emerges from a process in which those affected by it--in our context the fossil fuel industry--are informed and competent participants. To go beyond the existing literature on this phenomenon, we turn to our empirical context.

We will start by collecting quantitative data to taking stock of America's oil infrastructure. For that purpose, we collect data such as pipeline miles, throughput as well the locations of major reserves, refineries, and ports. We also collect data on environmental impacts, such as from the construction of new pipelines, from oil spills, and regular emissions. Most of the aforementioned is GIS data which we visualize using ggmap [@Kahle2013] and shiny [@Chang2021a] to obtain interactive maps. This quantitative data will be used to contextualize qualitative data, as props in interviews with informants, and to assess the relevance of our findings.


We will create the initial dataset for our qualitative analysis by searching the Factiva database for news stories relating to the pipeline industry published in the four American newspapers of record. Our observation period ranges from June 2009 to January 2020, which allows us to include all major public events concerning what is arguably the most important fossil fuel project of the 2010s: Keystone XL. From the news stories, and industry publications like the Oil & Gas journal we code the data for three kinds of events. (1) Announcements, planning meetings, public hearings and similar events. In these events, fossil fuel companies usually paint a prospective pipeline project as a legitimate, necessary, and beneficial technological accomplishment. In these events spokespeople and politicians encounter the public public. <!-- These events are usually attended by spokespeople, politicians, and some members of the public.  -->Fossil fuel companies typically steer these meetings by mobilizing their supporters, such as industry-affine politicians and unions. (2) Events in which any ongoing pipeline construction project with a valid permit is contested, for instance in a lawsuit, in the legislative arena, or in a protest. Fossil fuel companies dispatch lawyers, engineers, and expert witnesses to these events. <!-- Typical participants are activists, expert witnesses, pipeline engineers, and public figures.  -->In these events, fossil fuel companies can exert control by limiting the scope of proceedings, e.g., through their lawyers or through political supporters in the government. (3) Events in which the permit for any operational pipeline is contested, for instance enforcement action, technical reports, or public discourse following a pipeline spill attended by bureaucrats<!-- , environmentalists -->, and PR managers. Fossil fuels can influence the outcomes of these events through message control, but also through strategic ambiguity [cf. @Cappellaro2021], and obstruction.

The qualitative data collection and analysis will largely follow @Hardy2020. After selectively coding the collected data as described above, we create an event-history database of the relevant events. We then delve into the relevant events and code them for our concept of interest--in our case actions of fossil fuel companies that signify an active participation in ongoing policy and practice negotiations rather *before* they would be affected by the outcomes. We triangulate the information by interviewing participants and iterate over the steps of our analysis as necessary [@Hardy2020].<!-- We will then collect public data on those decisions via regulators’ websites through the docket that provides detailed data on the public responses to the decisions and disputes. --> For our first conference and journal submission from this two-year project, we synthesize the insights in a novel model on policy and practice negotiations. The model showcase the openness of the process in terms of participants, contents as well as time frames, and how a corporation can take advantage of those attributes, in contrast to the existing literature [@Lyon2015; @Bromley2012; @Oliver1991]. Through the selection of participants, through framing, through the delay or expedition of relevant processes that still happen in parallel, and through similar strategic action, fossil fuel companies can often steer policy and practice while it is still emergent. **>>Should also insert Maguire and Hardy (2009) somewhere here?<<**

<!-- We use a multi-step coding process to interpret our data, using the Atlas.ti software. In particular we identify through axial coding [@Strauss1990] documents in our database that relate to the competing technical and institutional imperatives that are of interest in--similar to the second stage of analysis in [@Maguire2013]. Where appropriate, we use quantitative data to supplement qualitative insights. For that purpose, we also collect data on operators, pipeline miles, pipeline spills, and the amount of fossil fuels transported. In this study we observe the process of policy emergence in the Anthropocene, decoupled from technical knowledge and driven by institutional imperatives [@Bromley2012; @Latour2015]. In particular, the first study will fill a gap in the Anthropocene literature: we produce solid empirical evidence of how institutional interests and strategic interventions by the fossil fuel industry [cf. @Oliver1991] explain human impacts on the environment. -->

### Stage 2: A model on means, ends, and actors in the Anthropocene

In the first stage, we analyzed how fossil fuel companies can affect both emergent policy and practice. In the second stage, we will turn to the complicated relationship between means and ends, as real and as perceived by different actors. The section on Objective two has already touched on several arenas where this relationship is debated. We use the same empirical context from Objective one--the American fossil fuel infrastructure--to assess arenas, actors, and means-ends relationships.

For that purpose, we will select a notable pipeline project, based on the data collected in the first stage. We map out the complete timeline of that pipeline project and identify moments in time where different groups grapple with and debate the environmental impacts of the pipeline project--the "Anthropocene moment." Those actors are company representative and politicians who support them, but also environmental activist, eco-conscious politicians, and of course academics. Considerable portions of the very polarized American public also support either side. In turn, we tune into every arena [@Latour2004] where the pipeline project is discussed. We first construct an event-history database based on press releases by news agencies to capture not only events where there is clear contestation--aka. news value--about environmental policy and outcomes. These press releases allow us to also capture uncontested events such as planning meetings which ultimately may have little news value, but potentially provide the actors' remarks on issues of the Anthropocene such as climate change prior to a contentious public discourse.

We will then "zoom in" [@Nicolini2009] to every arena in turn and observe public discourse. Relevant events may range from benign events such as a strategic lawsuits against legislation--intended to delay proceedings--to violent clashes between protesters, construction workers, and the police that are squashed by private security forces on behest of the fossil fuel company. We then construct the final dataset on the interactions in different arenas based on suitable sources such as government dockets with meeting minutes, press releases by pipeline operators and construction companies, and blogs as well as social media platforms where activists voice there concerns, plan their actions, and report events from their point of view. We finally triangulate our data by interviewing key participants in the process. We then develop insights on how interaction between the actors in a public arena affects the emergence of policy. In the prior stage, we were particularly interested in pervasive institutional interests that work toward the realization of new pipeline projects. Now, we take a more comprehensive look at all participants’ parts in the process, how they arrive at their ends, and what means they use in discourse to get there [cf. @Maguire2009].

---

## References